Word Count: 500–700 words
What to Include: Context and background of the research, the problem or question being addressed, a brief review of related work, the motivation and significance of your study, a clear statement of your research objectives or hypothesis.
=======
Please use this file to start drafting the "Introduction" for the project.

Air pollution is the most discussed issue at all times. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), exposure to contaminated air has led to an estimated 7 million premature deaths each year, mainly due to cardiovascular diseases, respiratory illnesses, and lung cancer [1]. Although this recognized importance, the establishment of air quality monitoring system remains limited because of its deployment and manintainance of sensor networks requires high budget and is of high complexity.

This study emphasizes the limitations that surrownd air quality monitoring systems by applying data-driven techniques to optimize pollution monitoring networks. By using the air quality dataset from 121 different locations in Chicago, collected through a sensor network deployed since July 2021. The objective is to establish a framework that enhances the connection and efficiency of sensors while extracting meaningful environmental insights. The parameters includes extensive spatial and temporal air quality data that includes readings for PM2.5, O₃ (ozone), NO₂ (nitrogen dioxide), and CO (carbon monoxide), simultaneously with metadata such as temperature, humidity, battery health.

The challenges includes massive volume and complexity of this geo-referenced data. By utilizing clustering methods (e.g., K-means, dbscan) along with Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) algorithms to decrease data redundancy and identify optimal sensor placements. This dual approach supports efficient network design by capturing spatial patterns and connectivity while maintaining accuracy of the full dataset. By implementing this methodology on real-world urban dataset, this study contributes a practical solution for environmental monitoring, helping city planners, researchers, and public health organizations in deploying smarter and efficient air quality surveillance systems.










[1] World Health Organization, “Health community calls for urgent action for clean air ahead of WHO conference,” World Health Organization, Jan. 27, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news/item/27-01-2025-health-community-calls-for-urgent-action-for-clean-air-ahead-of-who-conference
